---
layout: post
title: SPE Journal 2010
category: portfolio
tags: [Academic, Numerical, Physics, Publications]
feature:
  image: spe-journal-2010.jpg
  caption: Cartoon of electrical effects in porous media.
---
### Real-Time measurements of spontaneous potential for inflow monitoring in intelligent wells
*M. D. Jackson, M. Y. Gulamali, E. Leinov, J. H. Saunders and J. Vinogradov*

Spontaneous potential (SP) is routinely measured using wireline tools during
reservoir characterization. However, SP signals are also generated during
hydrocarbon production, because of gradients in the water phase pressure
(relative to hydrostatic), chemical composition and temperature. We suggest
that measurements of SP during production, using electrodes permanently
installed downhole, could be used to detect water encroaching on a well while
it is several tens to hundreds of meters away. We simulate numerically the SP
generated during production from a single vertical well, with pressure support
provided by water injection. We vary the production rate, and the temperature
and salinity of the injected water, to vary the contribution of the different
components of the SP signal. We also vary the values of the so-called
‘coupling coefficients’ which relate gradients in fluid potential, salinity
and temperature, to gradients in electrical potential. The values of these
coupling coefficients at reservoir conditions are poorly constrained.

We demonstrate that the SP signal peaks at the location of the moving
waterfront, where there are steep gradients in water saturation and
salinity. The signal decays with distance from the front, typically over
several tens to hundreds of meters; hence the encroaching water can be
detected before it arrives at the well. The SP signal at the well is dominated
by the electrokinetic and electrochemical components arising from gradients in
fluid potential and salinity. Larger signals will be obtained in low
permeability reservoirs produced at high rate, saturated with formation brine
of low salinity, or with brine of a very different salinity from that
injected. Inversion of the measured signals in conjunction with normally
available reservoir data could be used to determine the water saturation in
the vicinity of the well, and to regulate flow into the well using control
valves in order to maintain or increase oil production and delay or prevent
water production.

**Citation:** Jackson, M. D., M. Y. Gulamali, E. Leinov, J. H. Saunders and
J. Vinogradov (2010) Real-Time measurements of spontaneous potential for
inflow monitoring in intelligent wells, *Society of Petroleum Engineering
Journal*, Paper 135146-MS. DOI:
[10.2118/135146-MS](http://dx.doi.org/10.2118/135146-MS)
