---
title: First post
layout: post
category: blog
tags: [Jekyll, Website, Wordpress]
---
So I finally got over my [Wordpress](http://wordpress.org/) dependence and
moved this website to [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/). **I totally recommend it!**

Don't get me wrong, Wordpress is a great place to begin, with it's thriving
developer and design community, pseudo-infinite extensibility and shallow
learning curve.  But with that you have a relatively large code footprint and
a high maintenance workflow, which feels like too much for my (somewhat
simple) needs.  It doesn't help that my [PHP](http://php.net/) has also become
really rusty ([Pythonista](http://www.python.org/) and proud!).

Jekyll, on the other hand, is a *simple, blog-aware, static site generator*
created by some fine folks ([Tom Preston-Werner](https://github.com/mojombo)
in particular) at [GitHub](https://github.com/).  It requires a little more
work to start off with (installing the necessary Gems and setting up your
site), but doesn't require a full [LAMP
stack](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LAMP_software_bundle).  I'm also hosting
on GitHub pages ([fork this
site](https://github.com/mygulamali/mygulamali.github.io)!)  so I always have
a redundant backup of the entire website, and it fits better with my dev
workflow ([Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/),
[Git](http://git-scm.com/) etc.)

Anyhoo, so that should explain the sparseness of this website for the moment.
I intend to populate it with my old content and give it a lick of paint over
the next few weeks.  In the meantime, my *old Wordpress based website* is
still temporarily available *over here*.

And finally, the obligatory *Hello World*:

{% highlight c %}
#include <stdio.h>
int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
    printf("Hello World!\n");
    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

See what I did there? Woo!

**Update (4 February 2014):** My old website has now been obliterated.  All
the old things can now be viewed here instead.  Thank you!
