---
date: 2002-06-01
tags: publications
title: Spacecraft observations of magnetohydrodynamic turbulence in corotating interaction regions
---

Gulamali, M. Y. (2002) Spacecraft observations of magnetohydrodynamic turbulence
in corotating interaction regions, Ph.D. thesis, Imperial College of Science,
Technology and Medicine, University of London, London, U.K.

#### Abstract

During its unique voyage around the poles of the Sun, the Ulysses spacecraft
observed two sets of well-developed corotating interaction regions (CIRs) at
mid-heliographic latitudes. Because CIRs involve the interaction of plasmas from
different source regions on the Sun they provide a novel and complicated
environment in which to study the character and evolution of solar wind
turbulence. Consequently, in this thesis we present a study of the nature of
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence within the solar wind streams associated
with the CIRs observed by Ulysses.

We use Fourier spectral analysis and a wavelet based technique in order to
describe MHD fluctuations within CIRs. We use this to carry out a comprehensive
survey of the character of turbulence in the CIRs recorded by Ulysses. We also
perform one-dimensional numerical simulations of the interaction of Alfven waves
and MHD shocks in order to examine the nature of turbulent fluctuations within
the compression regions of CIRs.

Our findings suggest that each CIR observed by Ulysses has a very complicated
turbulent signature due to its specific structure, and the presence of transient
events in the CIR. However, statistical analyses of the data show that the
turbulent fluctuations in both sets of CIRs, were essentially the same, with
small differences being attributable to the relative difference in the phase of
the solar activity cycle when the measurements were made.

The results of our numerical studies suggest that the turbulent fluctuations in
the compression regions of CIRs are dependent upon the nature of the shocks
bounding the region, as well as turbulent fluctuations outside of the
compression region. We find that the reduction in the absolute value of the
normalised cross helicity in this region can be attributed to secondary waves
generated at the shock.
