---
date: 2004-11-09
tags: publications
title: Bistability of the thermohaline circulation identified through comprehensive 2-parameter sweeps of an efficient climate model
---

Marsh, R., A. Yool, T. M. Lenton, M. Y. Gulamali, N. R. Edwards, J. G. Shepherd,
M. Krznaric, S. Newhouse and S. J. Cox (2004) Bistability of the thermohaline
circulation identified through comprehensive 2-parameter sweeps of an efficient
climate model, _Climate Dynamics_, **23**, 761-777. DOI:
[10.1007/s00382-004-0474-1](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00382-004-0474-1).

#### Abstract

The effect of changes in zonal and meridional atmospheric moisture transports
on Atlantic overturning is investigated. Zonal transports are considered in
terms of net moisture export from the Atlantic sector. Meridional transports are
related to the vigour of the global hydrological cycle. The equilibrium
thermohaline circulation (THC) simulated with an efficient climate model is
strongly dependent on two key parameters that control these transports: an
anomaly in the specified Atlantic–Pacific moisture flux (\Delta Fa) and
atmospheric moisture diffusivity (Kq). In a large ensemble of spinup
experiments, the values of \Delta Fa and Kq are varied by small increments
across wide ranges, to identify sharp transitions of equilibrium THC strength in
a 2-parameter space (between Conveyor "On" and "Off" states). Final states from
this ensemble of simulations are then used as the initial states for further
such ensembles. Large differences in THC strength between ensembles, for
identical combinations of \Delta Fa and Kq, reveal the co-existence of two
stable THC states (Conveyor "On" and "Off")—i.e. a bistable regime. In further
sensitivity experiments, the model is forced with small, temporary freshwater
perturbations to the mid-latitude North Atlantic, to establish the minimum
perturbation necessary for irreversible THC collapse in this bistable regime. A
threshold is identified in terms of the forcing duration required. The model
THC, in a "Conveyor On" state, irreversibly collapses to a "Conveyor Off" state
under additional freshwater forcing of just 0.1 Sv applied for around 100 years.
The irreversible collapse is primarily due to a positive feedback associated
with suppressed convection and reduced surface heat loss in the sinking region.
Increased atmosphere-to-ocean freshwater flux, under a collapsed Conveyor, plays
a secondary role.
