---
title: Self-potential anomalies induced by water injection into hydrocarbon reservoirs
date: 2011-06-16
---

Gulamali, M. Y., E. Leinov and M. D. Jackson (2011), Self-potential anomalies
induced by water injection into hydrocarbon reservoirs, _Geophysics_, **76**
(No. 4), F283-F292, DOI:
[10.1190/1.3596010](http://dx.doi.org/10.1190/1.3596010).

#### Abstract

The injection of cold water into a hydrocarbon reservoir containing relatively
warmer, more saline formation brine may generate self-potential anomalies as a
result of electrokinetic, thermoelectric, and/or electrochemical effects. We
have numerically assessed the relative contributions of these effects to the
overall self-potential signal generated during oil produc-tion in a simple
hydrocarbon reservoir model. Our aim was to determine if measurements of
self-potential at a production well can be used to detect the movement of water
toward the well. The coupling coefficients for the electrochemical and
thermoelectric potentials are uncertain, so we considered four different models
for them. We also investigated the effect of altering the salinities of the
formation and injected brines. We found that the electrokinetic potential peaked
at the location of the saturation front (reaching values of 0.2 mV even for the
most saline brine considered). Moreover, the value at the production well
increased as the front approached the well, exceeding the noise level (&lt;0.1
mV). Thermoelectric effects gave rise to larger potentials in the reservoir (~10
mV), but values at the well were negligible (&lt;~0.1 mV) until after water
breakthrough because of the lag in the temperature front relative to the
saturation front. Electrochemical potentials were smaller in magnitude than
thermoelectric potentials in the reservoir but were measurable (&gt; 0.1 mV) at
the well because the salinity front was closely associated with the saturation
front. When the formation brine was less saline (~1 mol/liter), electrokinetic
effects dominated; at higher salinities (~5 mol/liter), electrochemical effects
were significant. We concluded that the measurement of self-potential signals in
a production well may be used to monitor the movement of water in hydrocarbon
reservoirs during production, but further research is required to understand the
thermoelectric and electrochemical coupling coefficients in partially saturated
porous media.
