---
title: "Spontaneous potentials in hydrocarbon reservoirs during waterflooding: Application to water-front monitoring"
date: 2012-03-01
---

Jackson, M. D., M. Y. Gulamali, E. Leinov, J. H. Saunders, and J. Vinogradov
(2012) Spontaneous potentials in hydrocarbon reservoirs during waterflooding:
Application to water-front monitoring, _Society of Petroleum Engineering
Journal_, **17**, Paper 135146-PA. DOI:
[10.2118/135146-PA](http://dx.doi.org/10.2118/135146-PA).

#### Abstract

Spontaneous potential (SP) is routinely measured using wireline tools during
reservoir characterization. However, SP signals are also generated during
hydrocarbon production, in response to gradients in the water-phase pressure
(relative to hydrostatic), chemical composition, and temperature. We use
numerical modeling to investigate the likely magnitude of the SP in an oil
reservoir during production, and suggest that measurements of SP, using
electrodes permanently installed downhole, could be used to detect and monitor
water encroaching on a well while it is several tens to hundreds of meters away.
We simulate the SP generated during production from a single vertical well, with
pressure support provided by water injection. We vary the production rate, and
the temperature and salinity of the injected water, to vary the contribution of
the different components of the SP signal. We also vary the values of the
so-called "coupling coefficients," which relate gradients in fluid potential,
salinity, and temperature to gradients in electrical potential. The values of
these coupling coefficients at reservoir conditions are poorly constrained.

We find that the magnitude of the SP can be large (up to hundreds of mV) and
peaks at the location of the moving water front, where there are steep gradients
in water saturation and salinity. The signal decays with distance from the
front, typically over several tens to hundreds of meters; consequently, the
encroaching water can be detected and monitored before it arrives at the
production well. Before water breakthrough, the SP at the well is dominated by
the electrokinetic and electrochemical components arising from gradients in
fluid potential and salinity; thermoelectric potentials only become significant
after water breakthrough, because the temperature change associated with the
injected water lags behind the water front. The shape of the SP signal measured
along the well reflects the geometry of the encroaching waterfront. Our results
suggest that SP monitoring during production, using permanently installed
downhole electrodes, is a promising method to image moving water fronts. Larger
signals will be obtained in low-permeability reservoirs produced at high rate,
saturated with formation brine of low salinity, or with brine of a very
different salinity from that injected.
